---
slug: pivot-di-toolkit
title: Pivot to a Dependency Injection Toolkit
authors: [bkonkle]
---

## Nakago Pivots to a Dependency Injection Toolkit

With the release of Nakago v0.23, the project is pivoting away from the ambitious goal of a full-featured API framework, and towards a more streamlined dependency injection toolkit instead. The async Rust ecosystem is growing rapidly, and I haven't been able to devote enough time to Nakago to grow the application lifecycle and convenience features that I had originally envisioned. There are other projects that are doing a great job of providing these features - like [Loco](https://loco.rs/), [Tide](https://github.com/http-rs/tide), [Seaography](https://github.com/SeaQL/seaography), or [Salvo](https://salvo.rs/).

What I haven't seen yet, however, is an async-first dependency injection container that is as lightweight and easy to work with as Nakago is, and doesn't require a lot of opaque macros or code generation. Nakago uses macros sparingly and takes advantage of Rust's `Any` dynamic typing tools to support a thread-safe, async-first dependency injection container that would work well with a variety of different Rust frameworks and team sizes.

I'll continue refining Nakago and adding features and integrations as I have need of them on side projects, and I'd love to collaborate with others who are interested in building a lightweight, async-first dependency injection toolkit for Rust.

### The v0.23 Changelog

### Removed

- `nakago` - Removed `Application`, `Hooks`, the `lifecycle::EventType` and `lifecycle::Events` enums. The `config` utilities were moved to `nakago-figment`.
- `nakago-axum` - Removed `AxumApplication`, `Route`, and `Routes` in favor of a more generic approach. Use the new `Inject` extractor to access dependencies in your Axum handlers.
- `nakago-warp` - Removed `WarpApplication`, `Route`, and `Routes` in favor of a more generic approach. Use the `with_injection()` Filter to access dependencies in your Warp handlers.

### Changed

- `nakago` - The tag-based container operations were previously the default mode of working with `Inject`. This proved to be more verbose and than necessary in most cases, however. The new default mode is to use the type-based operations, which are more ergonomic and easier to use. The tag-based operations are still available, but they are now suffixed with `_tag` to make it clear that they are a different mode of operation. The type-based operations are no longer suffixed with `_type`, because they are now the default.
- `nakago` - The `inject` namespace has been promoted to the top level. Where `nakago::inject` was used before, `nakago` should now be the equivalent.
- `nakago` - The `config` utilities were moved to `nakago-figment`.
- `nakago-examples-simple`, `nakago-examples-async-graphql`, `nakago-examples-simple-warp` - Updated with the new approach. See these examples for more information about how to use the tools mentioned above.

### Added

- `nakago-axum` - Added a new `Inject` extractor to access dependencies in your Axum handlers. This is a much more idiomatic way to use Nakago with Axum, and it's more flexible than the previous approach. Use the provided Axum `State` to make the `Inject` container available to your handlers.
- `nakago-figment` - Generic config utilities extracted from the core `nakago` package.
